>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JULY 9: AFTER A
NINE MONTH SIEGE, IRAQ DEFEATS
ISIS IN MOSUL.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, A
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN
VENEZUELAN LEADS THOUSANDS TO
FLEE ACROSS THE BORDER TO
COLOMBIA.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AFTER A NINE-MONTH OFFENSIVE,
THE AMERICAN-BACKED IRAQI ARMY
WON THE BATTLE FOR MOSUL TODAY.
THEY OUSTED ISIS FIGHTERS FROM
THE CITY IT HAD HELD FOR THREE
YEARS.
SOLDIERS WAVED IRAQI FLAGS AND
CELEBRATED IN THE STREETS, EVEN
THOUGH SPORADIC RESISTANCE BY
CORNERED ISIS MILITANTS
CONTINUES.
IT WAS SAFE ENOUGH FOR IRAQ'S
PRIME MINISTER HAIDER AL-ABADI
TO GO TO MOSUL AND ANNOUNCE ITS
LIBERATION AND CONGRATULATE
TROOPS ON THEIR VICTORY.
THIS VICTORY HAS HAD ITS COSTS.
IRAQI ARMY CASUALTIES WERE HIGH:
THE ARMY WON'T REVEAL FIGURES,
BUT THE PENTAGON HAS SAID THE
ELITE UNIT THAT SPEARHEADED THE
OFFENSIVE SUFFERED 40% LOSSES.
IN ADDITION, THOUSANDS OF IRAQI
CIVILIANS DIED, SO MANY TRAPPED
IN WHAT WAS IRAQ'S SECOND MOST
POPULOUS CITY.
AN ESTIMATED 900,000 IRAQI
CIVILIANS HAVE BEEN DISPLACED,
AND MOST OF MOSUL HAS BEEN
REDUCED TO RUBBLE.
JUST OVER THREE YEARS AGO, ISIS
LEADER ABU BAKR AL-BAGHDADI
ASCENDED THE PULPIT OF MOSUL'S
GRAND MOSQUE AND PROCLAIMED AN
ISIS CALIPHATE, OR ISLAMIC
STATE, STRETCHING FROM IRAQ TO
SYRIA.
NOW THAT MOSQUE LIES IN RUINS,
AND ISIS'S STRONGHOLD IN SYRIA,
THE CITY OF RAQQA, IS UNDER
SIEGE BY AMERICAN-BACKED
MILITIAS.
REUTERS REPORTER STEPHEN KALIN
IS IN IRAQ AND JOINS ME NOW VIA
SKYPE.
SO, HOW SIGNIFICANT WAS THIS
MOMENT?
>> VERY SIGNIFICANT.
THIS IS WE'RE GETTING VERY CLOSE
TO THE END OF A NEARLY NINE
MONTH BATTLE.
THERE ARE STILL A SMALL POCKET
OF TERRITORY IN MOSUL THAT
ISLAMIC STATE CONTROL, BUT WE
REALLY EXPECT THAT TO BE FINALLY
BE DONE TOMORROW.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAPPENS
NOW?
>> NOW, IN MOSUL, THE CITY HAS
TO START REBUILDING.
A LOT OF THE CITY HAS BEEN
DESTROYED.
I TALKED TO THE UNITED NATIONS A
FEW DAYS AGO, AND THEY TOLD ME
THAT JUST THE INITIAL STAGES OF
REBUILDING-- GETTING PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE WORKING AGAIN,
WHICH WILL TAKE ABOUT A YEAR AND
COST MORE THAN $1 BILLION.
AND ON TOP OF THAT I MEAN
THERE'S MUCH MORE LONG TERM
RECONSTRUCTION THAT HAS TO
HAPPEN.
ALL THE FIVE BRIDGES INSIDE
MOSUL ARE DESTROYED.
MOST OF THE OLD CITY IS IN
RUINS.
AND OTHER PARTS OF THE CITY ARE
HEAVILY DAMAGED.
PEOPLE'S HOMES ARE DESTROYED AND
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN LIVING THREE
YEARS UNDER BRUTAL RULE SO THEY
HAVE TO REALLY YOU KNOW READJUST
TO BEING BACK PART OF THE IRAQ.
>> Sreenivasan: EVEN IF YOU
REBUILD ALL THE INFRASTRUCTURE
WHAT ABOUT ALL THE PEOPLE THAT
HAVE LEFT?
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO
HAVE FLED.
WHEN ISIS CAME, A FEW HUNDRED
THOUSAND PEOPLE LEFT THE CITY.
BEFORE THEY SORT OF SHUT DOWN
ANY AVENUE TO ESCAPE, SO WHEN
THE BATTLE BEGAN NINE MONTHS
AGO, THERE WERE... WE ESTIMATED
ABOUT ONE-AND-A-HALF-MILLION
PEOPLE INSIDE THE CITY.
OF THAT 900,000 PEOPLE WERE
DISPLACED.
ABOUT A THIRD OF THAT WAS TO
CAMPS OUTSIDE OF THE CITY.
THE REST WERE TO OTHER HOUSES,
RELATIVES' HOMES, FRIENDS' HOMES
INSIDE THE CITY.
SO MOST OF THE POPULATION
ACTUALLY STAYED INSIDE THE CITY
BUT NOW THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
FIND A WAY TO REBUILD THEIR
HOMES THAT WERE DESTROYED AND
GET BACK TO A NORMAL LIFE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE A BIG
CITY-- THIS IS JUST CITY-- THERE
ARE STILL LOTS OF CITIES THAT
ARE UNDER ISIS CONTROL,
SMALLER ONES.
>> YES, THERE ARE A NUMBER OF
SMALLER CITIES TO THE SOUTH AND
WEST OF MOSUL AND WE'RE
EXPECTING THAT THE MILITARY
CAMPAIGN WILL CONTINUE WITH THE
HELP OF THE U.S.-LED COALITION.
THE BATTLE IS NOT OVER AGAINST
ISIS BY ANY STRETCH IN IRAQ.
AND IN ADDITION TO THOSE CITIES,
WE EXPECT THAT THERE WILL BE AN
INSURGENCY, THAT THERE WILL
BE ASYMMETRICAL TERRORIST
ATTACKS IN MOSUL AND OTHER PARTS
OF IRAQ.
SO IT'S... REALLY STABILIZING
IRAQ WILL CONTINUE TO BE AN
IMPORTANT MISSION FOR THE
SECURITY FORCES.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
STEPHEN KALIN FROM REUTERS,
JOINING US VIA SKYPE, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: IN NEIGHBORING
SYRIA, A CEASE-FIRE APPEARS TO
BE HOLDING TODAY IN THE
SOUTHWESTERN PART OF THE
COUNTRY, ACCORDING TO THE SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS AND
REBEL LEADERS.
IT WAS BROKERED BY THE UNITED
STATES, RUSSIA, AND JORDAN.
THE SIDES REPORT NO SIGNIFICANT
FIGHTING IN THE CEASE-FIRE ZONE.
RUSSIA SAYS THE ZONE COVERS
THREE SYRIAN PROVINCES NEAR
JORDAN, BUT DOES NOT INCLUDE THE
AREAS AROUND RAQQA IN THE NORTH,
WHERE SOME OF THE HEAVIEST
FIGHTING IS TAKING PLACE.
THE DEAL WAS ANNOUNCED DURING
THE G-20 SUMMIT IN GERMANY, AND
IN A TWEET TODAY, PRESIDENT
TRUMP SAID, "WE NEGOTIATED A
CEASE-FIRE IN PARTS OF SYRIA
WHICH WILL SAVE LIVES.
NOW IT IS TIME TO MOVE FORWARD
IN WORKING CONSTRUCTIVELY WITH
RUSSIA!"
THE CEASE-FIRE REPRESENTS THE
FIRST JOINT PEACEKEEPING EFFORT
IN SYRIA BY THE U.S. AND RUSSIA,
WHICH HAVE SUPPORTED OPPOSING
SIDES IN THE SIX-YEAR CIVIL WAR.
SECRETARY OF STATE REX TILLERSON
PRESSED RUSSIA TODAY TO STOP THE
VIOLENCE IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
WHILE VISITING UKRAINIAN
PRESIDENT PETRO POROSHENKO IN
THE COUNTRY'S CAPITAL OF KIEV,
TILLERSON SAID UKRAINE MUST
REGAIN CONTROL OF TWO PROVINCES
FROM SEPARATISTS HE DESCRIBED AS
RUSSIAN "PROXIES."
>> IT IS NECESSARY FOR RUSSIA TO
TAKE THE FIRST STEPS TO
DEESCALATE THE SITUATION IN THE
EASTERN PART OF UKRAINE, IN
PARTICULAR BY RESPECTING THE
CEASE-FIRE, BY PULLING BACK THE
HEAVY WEAPONS, AND ALLOWING THE
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT
POROSHENKO SAID TILLERSON TOLD
HIM THE U.S. SUPPORTS THE RETURN
OF CRIMEA TO UKRAINE, WHICH
RUSSIA ANNEXED IN 2014.
MEANWHILE PRESIDENT TRUMP TODAY
DEFENDED HIS FRIDAY MEETING WITH
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
AT THE G-20 SUMMIT IN GERMANY.
IN STATEMENTS ON TWITTER, HE
SAID, "I STRONGLY PRESSED
PRESIDENT PUTIN TWICE ABOUT
RUSSIAN MEDDLING IN OUR
ELECTION.
HE VEHEMENTLY DENIED IT.
I'VE ALREADY GIVEN MY
OPINION.....
PUTIN AND I DISCUSSED FORMING AN
IMPENETRABLE CYBER SECURITY UNIT
SO THAT ELECTION HACKING, AND
MANY OTHER NEGATIVE THINGS, WILL
BE GUARDED.
SANCTIONS WERE NOT DISCUSSED AT
MY MEETING WITH PRESIDENT PUTIN.
NOTHING WILL BE DONE UNTIL THE
UKRAINIAN AND SYRIAN PROBLEMS
ARE SOLVED!"
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S DIRECTOR OF
THE C.I.A.-- ONE OF THE MULTIPLE
AGENCIES THAT CONCLUDED RUSSIA
TRIED TO HACK THE ELECTION--
SAID TODAY MISTER TRUMP'S TONE
WITH MISTER PUTIN WAS OFF.
>> RIGHT BEFORE HE MET WITH MR.
PUTIN AND TALKED WITH HIM AT
SOME LENGTH, WHICH I'M GLAD HE
DID, HE SAID IT'S AN HONOR TO
MEET PRESIDENT PUTIN.
AN HONOR TO MEET THE INDIVIDUAL
WHO CARRIED OUT THE ASSAULT
AGAINST OUR ELECTION?
TO ME, IT WAS A DISHONORABLE
THING TO SAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHITE HOUSE
CHIEF OF STAFF REINCE PRIEBUS
SAID TODAY PRESIDENT TRUMP DID
NOT BELIEVE PUTIN'S DENIALS OF
MEDDLING.
UNITED NATIONS AMBASSADOR NIKKI
HALEY ADDED, "MISTER TRUMP
ADMONISHED THE RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
BY TELLING HIM, 'WE KNOW YOU DID
AND DON'T DO IT AGAIN.'"
>> EVERYBODY KNOWS THAT RUSSIA
MEDDLED IN OUR ELECTIONS.
EVERYBODY KNOWS THAT THEY'RE NOT
JUST MEDDLING IN THE UNITED
STATES' ELECTION.
THEY'RE DOING THIS ACROSS
MULTIPLE CONTINENTS, AND THEY'RE
DOING THIS IN A WAY THAT THEY'RE
TRYING TO CAUSE CHAOS WITHIN THE
COUNTRIES.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S WHY
REPUBLICAN SENATORS JOHN McCAIN
AND LINDSEY GRAHAM SAID TODAY
THERE SHOULD BE NEW SANCTIONS
IMPOSED ON RUSSIA.
A BIPARTISAN BILL THAT PASSED
THE SENATE LAST MONTH IS STALLED
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
>> I AM INTENT ON PUNISHING THE
RUSSIANS FOR INTERFERING IN OUR
ELECTION.
THEY DID IT IN FRANCE, THEY'RE
GONNA DO IT IN GERMANY.
THEY'RE DOING IT ALL OVER THE
WORLD.
THEY'RE DOING IT IN THE BALTICS,
BALKAN STATES, THEIR NEIGHBORS,
SO I WANT TO A CLEAR MESSAGE
THAT YOU WILL PAY THE PRICE FOR
UNDERCUTTING DEMOCRACY.
SEE A NEW ART EXHIBIT THAT
DOCUMENTS THE PRIVATE LIVES OF
PEOPLE WITH AIDS AND HIV FROM
THE 1980s TO THE PRESENT.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEKEND IN
INDIANAPOLIS, THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF SECRETARIES OF
STATE IS HOLDING ITS ANNUAL
MEETING.
THOSE ARE THE OFFICIALS WHO
OVERSEE ELECTIONS IN ALL 50
STATES.
IT'S USUALLY NOT A MEETING THAT
GARNERS A LOT OF ATTENTION, BUT
TWO THINGS MAKE THIS GATHERING
MORE IMPORTANT THIS YEAR.
ONE: JUST RECENTLY A NEW
ELECTION INTEGRITY COMMISSION
CREATED BY PRESIDENT TRUMP
REQUESTED ALL 50 STATES TO
PROVIDE DETAILED PERSONAL VOTER
INFORMATION TO FIGURE OUT, THEY
SAY, HOW TO PROTECT THE
INTEGRITY OF THE VOTE FROM
FRAUD.
MOST STATES ARE REFUSING TO
COMPLY EITHER PARTIALLY OR
COMPLETELY, BECAUSE HANDING OVER
SOME OF THIS INFORMATION
VIOLATES SOME STATE PRIVACY
LAWS.
THE OTHER REASON WE'RE PAYING
ATTENTION TO WHAT SECRETARIES
OF STATES DO IS THE SPECTER OF
RUSSIAN HACKING.
THE FORMER SECRETARY OF HOMELAND
SECURITY TESTIFIED TO CONGRESS
UNDER OATH LAST MONTH THE
RUSSIANS DID INDEED ATTEMPT TO
HACK VOTER REGISTRATION SOFTWARE
DURING THIS PAST ELECTION.
JOINING ME NOW FROM INDIANAPOLIS
TO DISCUSS THIS IS DENISE
MERRILL, PRESIDENT OF THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION AND
CONNECTICUT'S SECRETARY OF
STATE.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FROM EVERY INDICATION, IT SEEMS
THAT PRESIDENT TRUMP BELIEVES
PUTIN IN HIS DENIAL THAT THE
RUSSIANS MEDDLED IN THE
ELECTION.
DO THE SECRETARIES OF STATE
BELIEVE THE EVIDENCE PRESENTED
BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY?
>> WELL, PART OF THE PROBLEM
HERE IS WE DON'T REALLY KNOW
WHAT THAT EVIDENCE IS BECAUSE WE
DON'T HAVE SECURITY CLEARANCE
SO WE ARE KIND OF THE LAST TO
KNOW AND LOT OF THIS WE READ IN
THE PAPER.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SECRETARIES
OF STATE ARE READING THIS
INFORMATION IN THE PAPER AT
THE SAME TIME WE ARE, MEANING
YOU DON'T HAVE ANY KIND OF
HOTLINE THAT YOU ARE GETTING A
PHONE CALL ON SAYING, "HEY, WE
THINK YOU MIGHT'VE BEEN HACKED."
>> NO, AND THAT'S BEEN SORT OF
A PROBLEM.
ALTHOUGH ALL 50 STATES DO ALL
KINDS OF, YOU KNOW, SCANS OF
THEIR VOTER FILES AND LET ME BE
CLEAR: THE ONLY THING REALLY AT
RISK HERE IS THE VOTER FILE.
THE REGISTRY OF ALL THE VOTERS
IN EACH STATE AND THEY'RE KEPT
ON A STATEWIDE BASIS.
BUT NONE OF THE ACTUAL ELECTION
EQUIPMENT IS EVER TOUCHED.
IT'S NOT ON THE INTERNET.
>> Sreenivasan: AS SOME OF THE
REPORTING EARLIER POINTED OUT
THE DAMAGING OR CHANGING THAT
VOTER FILE OR EVEN CAUSING SOME
CONFUSION, THAT CAN CAUSE
THINGS LIKE DELAYS AT THE POLLS
OR PERHAPS CREATE DISINCENTIVES
FOR PEOPLE TO SHOW UP.
>> INDEED IT COULD.
AND I THINK THAT'S THE BIGGEST
DAMAGE THAT COULD BE DONE, WOULD
BE THE CONFUSION THAT WOULD
RESULT.
ALTHOUGH WE ALL HAVE PAPER
BACKUPS OF ALL THESE LISTS.
SO THE REAL DAMAGE IS MORE TO,
I GUESS YOU WOULD SAY, TO THE
INTEGRITY OF THE VOTE, THE
CONFIDENCE THAT PEOPLE HAVE THAT
THEIR VOTE'S BEING COUNTED HAS
BEEN THE BIGGEST LOSER IN THIS
WHOLE THING.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU HAD CLOSED
DOOR MEETINGS DURING YOUR
CONFERENCE WITH THE DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY, WITH THE
F.B.I., WOULD THE INFORMATION
THEY PRESENT TO YOU NOW, ARE YOU
CONFIDENT THAT ALL OUR SYSTEMS
ARE SECURE, THAT RUSSIA OR ANY
OTHER FOREIGN COUNTRIES CANNOT
DO THIS TO US AGAIN?
>> I THINK WE'RE AS SECURE AS WE
CAN BE.
WE ARE IN THE ELECTRONIC AGE,
NO ONE IS ENTIRELY SAFE.
WE HAVE LOTS OF USERS OF THESE
SYSTEMS.
THE LOCAL OFFICIALS ARE THE ONES
THAT ACTUALLY KEEP THE LISTS AND
THEY LOG ON TO THESE SYSTEMS.
BUT I THINK THE BEST DEFENSE
AGAINST ALL THAT IS THE FACT
THAT THEY ARE KEPT IN 50 STATES
IN 50 SEPARATE DATABASES, AND
ALL THE ELECTION RESULTS AND
EVERYTHING ARE TALLIED LOCALLY.
IT'S AN EXTREMELY DECENTRALIZED
SYSTEM AND THAT'S A BLESSING
IN THE END.
>> Sreenivasan: TURNING NOW A
LITTLE BIT TO THE VOTER ELECTION
COMMISSION, ROOTING OUT FRAUD IN
THE SYSTEM SEEMS TO BE THE
THRUST OF WHY THE COMMISSION WAS
SET UP.
DO SECRETARIES OF STATE
BELIEVE THE PRESIDENT'S CLAIM
THAT THREE MILLION FRAUDULENT
VOTES WERE CAST THIS ELECTION TO
HIS OPPONENT?
>> I WOULD SAY OF COURSE THAT
DIFFERS STATE BY STATE BUT
EVERY STATE THAT I HAVE SEEN
STATEMENTS FROM HAVE SAID NO,
THEY DO NOT BELIEVE THAT
THERE'S ANYWHERE NEAR THAT
NUMBER.
REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS ALIKE
HAVE SAID THAT YES, DOES FRAUD
OCCUR OCCASIONALLY IN THEIR
STATES?
YES.
IS IT PROSECUTED?
YES, BUT IT IS NOWHERE NEAR THE
NUMBERS THEY ARE TALKING ABOUT.
IT'S WIDELY SEEN AS A VERY, VERY
OVERSTATED NUMBER.
>> Sreenivasan: AS YOU JUST
POINTED OUT, ONE OF THE
STRENGTHS OF THE SYSTEM IS THE
FACT THAT IT'S SO DECENTRALIZED.
ARE YOU CONCERNED THAT A
CENTRALIZED VOTER FILE WHICH
IS IN ESSENCE IS WHAT WOULD
HAPPEN IF THE ADMINISTRATION GOT
ALL THIS INFORMATION FROM ALL OF
THESE STATES, COULD BE HELD
SECURELY?
>> I'M DEEPLY CONCERNED ABOUT
THAT PERSONALLY.
AND I DON'T SPEAK NOW FOR EVERY
SECRETARY OF STATE-- AS YOU
SAID, IT'S VERY DECENTRALIZED.
BUT I'M DEEPLY CONCERNED ABOUT
THAT.
IT SEEMS LIKE A VERY ODD MOMENT
WHEN WE ARE TALKING ABOUT THE
DANGERS OF CYBER SECURITY, TO BE
CENTRALIZING A VOTER FILE
SOMEHOW.
AND NOW I'M TOLD IT'S ON A
COMPUTER AT THE WHITE HOUSE,
WHICH ALSO DOES NOT FILL ME
WITH CONFIDENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: DENISE MERRILL,
PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF SECRETARIES OF
STATES OF STATE, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: DESPITE THE
LARGEST OIL RESERVES IN THE
WORLD, VENEZUELA'S ECONOMY IS IN
A FREE FALL.
IT HAS TRIPLE-DIGIT INFLATION,
AND EVERYTHING HAS BECOME
SCARCE, INCLUDING FOOD AND
MEDICINE.
FOR MONTHS, PROTESTERS HAVE
TAKEN TO THE STREETS IN THE
CAPITAL OF CARACAS.
THEY HAVE TRIED TO CHANGE THE
DIRECTION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF
PRESIDENT NICOLAS MADURO.
NOW, MORE AND MORE VENEZUELANS
ARE DECIDING IT'S BETTER TO
LEAVE THEIR HOMELAND, WITH TENS
OF THOUSANDS TRYING TO RESETTLE
IN NEIGHBORING COLOMBIA.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WITH SUPPORT FROM THE PULITZER
CENTER ON CRISIS REPORTING,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT NADJA
DROST AND VIDEOGRAPHER BRUNO
FEDERICO REPORT ON THE EXODUS
FROM VENEZUELA.
>> Reporter: IN THE BORDER TOWN
OF SAN ANTONIO DE TACHIRA,
VENEZUELANS FED UP WITH THEIR
HARDSHIPS ARE FLEEING THEIR
COUNTRY EVERY DAY, BY FOOT, FOR
COLOMBIA.
THEY EXIT CARS AND BUSES
SUITCASES IN HAND, AND WALK
TOWARD THE SIMON BOLIVAR
INTERNATIONAL BRIDGE AND CROSS
INTO THE TOWN OF CUCUTA.
SOME ARE HEADING OFF INTO THE
UNCERTAIN WORLD OF THOSE WHO
EMIGRATE WITHOUT A WORK VISA.
VENEZUELAN LUISA GOMEZ ARRIVED
TWO MONTHS AGO.
A SINGLE MOTHER, SHE TRIES TO
SUPPORT HER FIVE CHILDREN,
GRANDCHILD, AND MOTHER BY
SELLING TOOTHBRUSHES AND
TOOTHPASTE ON PUBLIC BUSES.
>> (translated): IT'S
DIFFICULT, THERE'S SOME DRIVERS
WHO DON'T LET YOU WORK, BECAUSE
SO MANY VENEZUELANS HAVE
ARRIVED, THERE'S A LOT OF
VENDORS.
>> Reporter: GOMEZ IS ON THE
MOVE FROM DAWN TILL DUSK SEVEN
DAYS A WEEK.
AFTER TIPPING DRIVERS WHO LET
HER ON, GOMEZ NETTED TWO DOLLARS
YESTERDAY.
TODAY SHE WENT HOME WITH $13--
BARELY ENOUGH TO FEED HER KIDS.
>> (translated): WHEN I ENTER
THIS DOOR, THE FIRST THING THEY
ASK ME IS, "MAMA, WHAT DID YOU
BRING ME?" AND IT'S SAD TO
ARRIVE AT HOME WITHOUT ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: HOME FOR NOW IS A
BARE BONES HOUSE THAT A LOCAL
CHURCH MEMBER HAS LET HER LIVE
IN RENT-FREE UNTIL NOVEMBER.
SHE'S ALREADY BEHIND ON UTILITY
BILLS.
>> (translated): IF I DON'T
EVEN HAVE $35 TO PAY FOR THE
GAS, HOW AM I GOING TO PAY FOR
RENT?
I DON'T KNOW WHAT I'M GOING TO
DO.
THIS IS DISTRESSING.
>> Reporter: GOMEZ HOPES SHE CAN
GET A WORK PERMIT AND HER KIDS
COULD BE ELIGIBLE FOR SCHOOLS
HERE-- WHATEVER SHE CAN DO TO
AVOID GOING BACK TO VENEZUELA.
>> (translated): IF GOD
PERMITS THAT THINGS GET SETTLED,
I'LL STAY HERE IN COLOMBIA,
TRYING TO RAISE MY KIDS.
IT'S DIFFICULT TO START WITH
ZERO AND SLEEPING ON A MATTRESS
ON THE FLOOR.
>> Reporter: WITH COLOMBIA'S 50-
YEAR CIVIL WAR HAVING REACHED A
TRUCE LAST YEAR, MANY
VENEZUELANS SEE COLOMBIA AS A
SAFER BET THAN STAYING PUT.
FOR DECADES, COLOMBIANS FLEEING
THE ARMED CONFLICT CROSSED THIS
BRIDGE IN DROVES INTO
NEIGHBORING VENEZUELA TO SEEK
REFUGE.
BUT NOW THE TRAFFIC IS GOING THE
OTHER WAY.
EVERY DAY, TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
VENEZUELANS WALK THIS BRIDGE TO
CROSS INTO COLOMBIA-- TO SEEK
MEDICAL ATTENTION, BUYING BASIC
GOODS, LIKE FLOUR AND TOILET
PAPER, OR TO MOVE THEIR ENTIRE
LIVES ACROSS THE BRIDGE AND TRY
TO START NEW ONES IN COLOMBIA.
ON THE COLOMBIAN SIDE OF THE
BRIDGE, VENDORS AND SMALL SHOPS
HAVE POPPED UP NEXT TO MONEY-
CHANGERS, WHERE VENEZUELANS
EXCHANGE WAGES PAID IN THEIR
DEVALUED CURRENCY-- A WEEK'S
WORTH OF WAGES GETS THEM A FEW
BAGS OF CORNMEAL, RICE AND BARS
OF SOAP.
A FEW MINUTES' WALK FROM THE
BRIDGE, THERE'S A LINE DOWN THE
BLOCK FOR A SOUP KITCHEN RUN BY
A LOCAL CHURCH.
IT OPENED IN MARCH TO RESPOND TO
THE INFLUX OF HUNGRY
VENEZUELANS.
IT SERVES 500 TO 800 LUNCHES A
DAY.
SOME STAY INDEFINITELY.
OTHERS, LIKE THIS WOMAN, GO HOME
TO VENEZUELA AFTER SPENDING THE
DAY CARTING MIGRANTS' BELONGINGS
ACROSS THE BRIDGE FOR CASH.
>> (TRANSLATED): CARRYING
SUITCASES WITH MY KID AND
WHAT I MAKE WITH THAT IS FOR
FOOD FOR THE HOUSE.
>> Reporter: COLOMBIA HAS BECOME
A LIFELINE FOR VENEZUELANS, NOT
ONLY FOR FOOD AND SUPPLIES, BUT
ALSO MEDICAL SERVICES CURRENTLY
UNAVAILABLE OR UNAFFORDABLE IN
VENEZUELA.
VENEZUELANS HAVE DISCOVERED ONE
WAY TO ACCESS COLOMBIA'S HEALTH
CARE SYSTEM IS THROUGH
HOSPITAL EMERGENCY ROOMS.
AT THE MAIN HOSPITAL IN CUCUTA,
DR. ANDRES GALVIS SAYS E.R.
ADMISSIONS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
HAVE JUMPED 50% IN THE PAST
YEAR.
>> THEY ARE PATIENTS WHO HAVE
NO, NO, NO RESOURCES, NONE.
THEY ARRIVE HERE IN REALLY BAD
SHAPE.
CHILDREN WHO OFTEN REQUIRE
DIALYSIS, WITH SEVERELY INFECTED
KIDNEYS.
EVERYONE INJURED BY FIREARMS OR
IN TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS, ALL
CLASSES OF TRAUMA.
>> Reporter: DR. GALVIS SAYS
WITH DIRE HOSPITAL CONDITIONS IN
VENEZUELA, MANY EXPECTING
MOTHERS FLOCK TO COLOMBIA TO
GIVE BIRTH.
HIS MATERNITY WARD TRAFFIC IS UP
100% THIS YEAR.
>> (translated): THE PATIENT
ARRIVES WHEN SHE'S ALREADY IN
LABOR, IN PAIN.
THEY WAIT UNTIL THEY'RE IN
LABOR, THE WATER'S BROKEN, AND
WHOOSH, YOU ATTEND TO THEM.
>> Reporter: JOHANNA SANCHEZ
LEFT VENEZUELA WHEN SHE WAS
FOUR MONTHS PREGNANT.
>> (translated): WITH THE
SITUATION THERE, I COULDN'T
RETURN.
I HAD A BABY LAST YEAR, AND IT
DIED ON ME.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS HER LAST
BIRTH HAD COMPLICATIONS, AND THE
BABY REQUIRED AN OPERATION.
AFTERWARDS, SHE SAYS, THE
VENEZUELAN HOSPITAL DIDN'T HAVE
A CATHETER THAT WAS THE RIGHT
SIZE.
>> (translated): THEY FOUND A
DIFFERENT ONE, BUT IT WAS
THICKER, TOO THICK FOR THE
BABY'S VEIN.
IT LEAKED, THERE WERE
COMPLICATIONS.
HE LASTED 19 DAYS.
>> Reporter: IN VENEZUELA,
WILLIAM BAYONA SUPPORTS HIS
FAMILY WITH THE LITTLE MONEY HE
MAKES DRIVING KIDS TO SCHOOL IN
HIS VAN.
BUT NOW HE NEEDS CATARACT
SURGERY.
>> (translated): THE DOCTOR
PROHIBITED ME FROM DRIVING, BUT
I CAN'T LET MYSELF STOP, BECAUSE
WHO'S GOING TO SUPPORT MY FAMILY
AND ME?
>> Reporter: BORN IN COLOMBIA,
WILLIAM IS A BIT LUCKIER THAN
MOST VENEZUELANS: HE'S A DUAL
CITIZEN WHO QUALIFIES FOR FREE,
GOVERNMENT-PROVIDED HEALTH CARE
IN COLOMBIA.
HE CROSSED THE BORDER WITH HIS
COUSIN.
>> WE'RE IN COLOMBIA!
>> Reporter: I ASKED HIM WHAT
HIS SITUATION WOULD BE LIKE IF
HE WASN'T A DUAL CITIZEN.
>> ONE COULDN'T EVEN THINK ABOUT
IT WITHOUT A COLOMBIAN ID;
THERE'S NO INSURANCE.
>> Reporter: HE'S COME TO THIS
CLINIC IN CUCUTA, BECAUSE
CATARACT SURGERY IN VENEZUELA IS
AVAILABLE ONLY AT PRIVATE
CLINICS HE CAN'T AFFORD.
>> (translated): IT'S TOO
EXPENSIVE.
TO GET THAT KIND OF MONEY, YOU'D
HAVE TO WORK FOR A YEAR.
>> Reporter: WITH LIMITED
COLOMBIAN GOVERNMENT SUPPORT, A
CATHOLIC MISSION IN CUCUTA HAS
COME TO THE AID OF VENEZUELAN
MIGRANTS-- PROVIDING LUNCH
PROGRAMS FOR CHILDREN, WORKSHOPS
FOR MOTHERS TO START MICRO-
ENTERPRISES, AND HELPING
FAMILIES FIND HOMES.
FATHER FRANCESCO BORTIGNON RUNS
IT, AND WANTS COLOMBIAN
AUTHORITIES TO BE MORE
RESPONSIVE TO THE MIGRANTS.
>> (translated): WHAT IS
IMPORTANT FOR US IS THAT THE
STATE OPENS ITS EYES AND SEES
THAT THERE IS ALREADY A
SIGNIFICANT NUMBER OF PEOPLE
WITH VERY SPECIFIC NEEDS, FOR
WHOM THE STATE IS DOING NOTHING,
BECAUSE THE ONLY ONES DOING
ANYTHING ARE US HUMANITARIAN
ORGANIZATIONS.
>> Reporter: WITHOUT LEGAL
STATUS OR WORK PERMITS, MANY
VENEZUELANS GET PUSHED TO THE
MARGINS OF COLOMBIAN SOCIETY.
SOME, LIKE MARIA RIVERA, LIVE IN
NEIGHBORHOODS LIKE THIS ONE,
SQUATTING ON LAND BY A CREEK
FULL OF RAW SEWAGE.
AFTER EMIGRATING, RIVERA LIVED
IN A BETTER HOUSE WITH HER
HUSBAND AND THEIR FIVE-YEAR-OLD
SON.
BUT HER HUSBAND'S SPORADIC WORK
AS A DAY LABORER CAN'T COVER
THEIR RENT AND UTILITIES.
>> (translated): HE'S EARNING
VERY LITTLE NOW, ABOUT $40 A
WEEK, AND WITH THAT WE HAVE TO
PAY THE RENT.
THAT'S WHY I'M MOVING, BECAUSE
THE RENT'S GOT ME UP TO HERE.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE MOVING
HERE, WHERE THERE'S NO RENT,
INTO A ONE-ROOM SHACK WITH A
DIRT FLOOR.
HER HUSBAND BUILT IT WITH
PLASTIC TARPS AND SECOND-HAND
PLANKS OF WOOD.
>> (translated): THIS IS WHERE
THE KITCHEN WILL BE, THERE'LL BE
A LITTLE TABLE AND THE TWO-
BURNER STOVE.
>> Reporter: RIVERA'S NEIGHBORS,
WHO ALSO FLED VENEZUELA'S
HARDSHIPS, ARE STRUGGLING IN
COLOMBIA.
THEIR HUSBANDS ARE OUT LOOKING
FOR WORK.
>> (translated): IF THEY GET
WORK, THEY DON'T PAY THEM AS
THEY SHOULD.
THEY PAY VERY LITTLE.
MY HUSBAND WORKS IN A HARDWARE
STORE, BUT THEY DON'T PAY HIM
THE CORRECT WAGE.
>> (translated): A COLOMBIAN'S
DAY WAGE IS BETWEEN $10 AND $13.
THAT'S THE MINIMUM.
FOR A VENEZUELAN, THEY GIVE $5,
$7 DOLLARS A DAY.
>> Reporter: SOME COLOMBIAN
EMPLOYERS TAKE ADVANTAGE OF
THESE VENEZUELANS LIVING IN THE
SHADOWS.
OTHERS BUSINESSES WON'T HIRE
VENEZUELANS WITHOUT WORK PERMITS
FOR FEAR OF GOVERNMENT FINES.
AS A RESULT, VENEZUELAN MIGRANTS
ARE PUSHED INTO PRECARIOUS JOBS,
SELLING THEIR WARES IN THE
STREETS FOR TINY AMOUNTS OF
CASH.
EVEN CHILDREN ARE PRESSED INTO
SALES.
DEPORTATIONS ARE RARE AND
CUCUTA'S MAYOR SAYS THE INFLUX
OF VENEZUELAN MIGRANTS WILLING
TO WORK FOR LESS IS MAKING IT
HARDER FOR HIS CONSTITUENTS TO
FIND JOBS.
>> ( translated ): I'M WORRIED
ABOUT THE LACK OF WORK
OPPORTUNITIES IN MY CITY.
FOR WHOM?
FOR MY CITIZENS, FOR THOSE WHO
LIVE IN CUCUTA.
BUT IF THERE'S AN EXODUS OF
200,000 OR 300,000 VENEZUELANS,
WELL, UNEMPLOYMENT IS GOING TO
RISE IN OUR CITY.
>> Reporter: IN EXPECTATION OF
AN EVEN GREATER INFLUX FROM
VENEZUELA, SHOULD THE
GOVERNMENT OF PRESIDENT NICOLAS
MADURO COLLAPSE, MAYOR ROJAS
SAYS REGIONAL AND NATIONAL
AUTHORITIES ARE MAKING
EMERGENCY PLANS.
>> (translated): WE DON'T KNOW
HOW MANY PEOPLE WE'LL BE ABLE TO
RECEIVE.
WE HAVE ARENAS READY FOR
WHATEVER MOMENT THERE'S AN
AVALANCHE OF VENEZUELANS, IF
THERE'S A COUP D'ETAT, WE'LL BE
ON THE ALERT.
BUT I CAN'T SAY THAT I'M GOING
TO BUILD SHELTERS FOR REFUGEES.
>> Reporter: WITH OR WITHOUT
A WARM WELCOME, THE
VENEZUELANS KEEP COMING.
WITH COLOMBIAN AUTHORITIES
ESTIMATING 100,000 HAVE SETTLED
IN COLOMBIA THIS YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: DONALD TRUMP JR.
SAYS A RUSSIAN LAWYER WHO HAS
ADVOCATED FOR THE KREMLIN USED A
FALSE PRETEXT TO MEET HIM IN
TRUMP TOWER LAST JUNE, JUST TWO
WEEKS AFTER HIS FATHER CLINCHED
THE REPUBLICAN NOMINATION.
THE PRESIDENT'S SON TELLS THE
NEW YORK TIMES THE LAWYER CLAIMS
SHE HAD DAMAGING INFORMATION ON
HILLARY CLINTON.
TRUMP JUNIOR SAYS THE WOMAN
STATED SHE HAD INFORMATION THAT
INDIVIDUALS CONNECTED TO RUSSIA
WERE FUNDING THE D.N.C. AND
SUPPORTING CLINTON.
HER STATEMENTS WERE VAGUE,
AMBIGUOUS AND MADE NO SENSE.
NO DETAILS OR SUPPORTING
INFORMATION WAS PROVIDED OR EVEN
OFFERED.
IT QUICKLY BECAME CLEAR SHE HAD
NO MEANINGFUL INFORMATION.
HE ALSO SAID THE MEETING THEN
TOWARD AN AMERICAN LAW THAT
PUNISHES RUSSIAN HUMAN RIGHTS
ABUSERS.
TRUMP JUNIOR BROUGHT HIS BROTHER
IN LAW JARED KUSHNER AND TRUMP
CAMPAIGN CHAIRMAN PAUL MANAFORT
TO THE MEETING, BOTH OF WHOM
HAVE RECENTLY DISCLOSED IT IN
GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS.
AND FINALLY, FOLLOWING PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S FIRST MEETING WITH
VLADIMIR PUTIN, THE NEWSHOUR AND
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND BEGIN A SIX
PART SERIES STARTING TOMORROW,
INSIDE PUTIN'S RUSSIA AS
REPORTED BY SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT NICK SCHIFRIN AND
PRODUCER ZACH FANNIN.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.